Databricks - A Unit Testing Approach (#269)
MechanicalRock/mechanicalrock.github.io: _posts/2022-12-12-deltalake-spark-testing-learnings.md

---
layout: post
font: serif
title: Databricks - An Approach To Unit Testing
date: 2022-10-27
highlight: monokai
author: Bryan Yu
image: /img/blog/databricks/databricks.png
tags: databricks deltatable dataframes spark workflows integration unit testing
description: Lets look at testing our code using delta lake and spark
---

In the world of software development, unit testing is a concept already understood and quite widely adopted as good practice throughout various teams and industries. You write a failing test, then write the code to make it pass and rinse repeat if you closely follow Test Driven Development. 

> On the other hand, in the data land however this is not usually an area explored much at all as engineers would code up some complex SQL statements and transformation tasks in the data software of their choice but not store it in version control nor having automated tests to verify it still works as intended as it goes through iterative changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the data land however, this is not usually an area explored much at all as engineers would code up some complex SQL statements and transformation tasks in the data software of their choice but not store it in version control nor having automated tests to verify it still works as intended as it goes through iterative changes.
```

Author: cheers

If you are using a tool like Snowflake, you can easily write integration tests for things like your procedures or UDFs if you use them to run your data transformation tasks. With Databricks however, the landscape is a bit different in some aspects in that we can also dip our hands into unit testing, so lets find out why!

Before we commence, please note that any examples and discussions below regarding unit testing will be focused on users who are currently writing their code in `python 3` and running orchestrations via `Databricks Workflows` as `Delta Live Tables` are a separate topic altogether. 

The following topics will be covered here as we make our way to unit testing. If you are already familiar with points 1-3, them skip to the last section at the bottom `Unit Testing`: 

> 1. Delta Lake
> 2. Apache Spark & PySpark
> 3. Integration Testing 
> 4. Unit Testing

Reviewer: Suggestion: Add anchors to the headings below and make these clickable links.
```suggestion
1. [Delta Lake](#delta-lake)
2. [Apache Spark & PySpark](#pyspark)
3. [Integration Testing](#integration-testing) 
4. [Unit Testing](#unit-testing)
```

Author: oo nifty thanks

### Delta Lake

<img height="100px" src="/img/blog/databricks/delta-lake.png" />
<br/><br/>

Delta Lake is the open source storage framework providing key features such as ACID transactions and time travel features. Delta Lake is not only compatible with Spark but is also what Databricks utilises for data storage and table management. As a result the types of tables we will be dealing with for the most part are delta tables. The storage format of these delta tables are basically parquet files. 

You can see more details in the official docs [delta.io](https://delta.io/) if you wish to learn more. Interesting stuff!

### Apache Spark

<img height="100px" src="/img/blog/databricks/apache-spark.png" />
<br/><br/>

> Apache Spark is an analytics query engine which is good for large scale and batched data workloads, machine learning and real time analytics. Long story short, Databricks is built on Spark and PySpark and hence knowledge in those areas could help quite significantly. 

Reviewer: Needs a link to the documentation, as per Delta Lake above?

Author: added

Apache Spark also supports APIs for developing in R, Java, Scala and Python. This translates to Databricks as well as you find that our notebooks can be written purely as a bunch of SQL commands or in one of those languages as listed above but alas, we will be focusing on Python and PySpark (its just the python library that interfaces Apache Spark).

### Integration Testing

> While integration testing on Databricks is not covered in this blog, is essential in my opnion that time and effort are still dedicated into comprehensively writing these out as well using a library like `Great Expectations`, running in a notebook and serving as an additional step at the gold layer of your workflow. This serves its purpose to verify that data quality standards are constantly met and if anything unexpected comes up, we fail the workflow and generate a detailed visual report for users to view and understand what the unexpected data is before it gets to the consumers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While integration testing on Databricks is not covered in this blog, is essential in my opnion that time and effort are still dedicated into comprehensively writing these out as well using a library like [`Great Expectations`](url_here), running in a notebook and serving as an additional step at the gold layer of your workflow. This serves its purpose to verify that data quality standards are constantly met and if anything unexpected comes up, we fail the workflow and generate a detailed visual report for users to view and understand what the unexpected data is before it gets to the consumers. 
```

Suggestion - add a link to Great Expectations.

Author: added

With that said, defects in data quality may appear as a consequence of the following scenarios such as regression in our data transformation logic or changes in upstream system which resulted in changes to data layout, representation, schema and so forth.

### Unit Testing

> So it seems that integration tests for our data pipeline is plenty beneficial but why not stop there? well, one of the few benefits of unit testing is that we get to rapidly ensure our `code` meets quality standards and whilst detecting certain regressions earlier in the dev lifecycle which gives us more confidence to move faster as code can get committed and deployed more frequently. Lets now dive into the details of unit testing our code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So it seems that integration tests for our data pipeline is plenty beneficial but why stop there? One of the  benefits of unit testing is that we get to rapidly ensure our `code` meets quality standards and detect certain regressions earlier in the development lifecycle. This gives us more confidence to move faster, as code can get committed and deployed more frequently. Lets now dive into the details of unit testing our code.
```
Minor editing suggestions.

Author: thanks

*Dockerfile*
```
FROM python:3.9.5

RUN apt-get update && apt-get install openjdk-11-jdk -y
RUN pip3 install -r requirements.txt

CMD export PYSPARK_SUBMIT_ARGS='--packages io.delta:delta-core_2.12:2.2.0 pyspark-shell' \
    pytest path/to/tests/**/*
```

If you are wondering why theres no Apache setup steps above, then remember that we are will be installing pyspark via pip instead which will suffice for local development activities. 

Most of the other config is stock standard, with the exception of the `PYSPARK_SUBMIT_ARGS`. Its one of those things you need to set to run these tests as a workaround certain known issues with running locally. At the end of the day, these are just arguments that end up being supplied to `spark submit` which is a script that Spark uses to launch apps on a cluster. 

Why you might still ask? well, the purpose behind each argument is as follows:

> 1. io.delta:delta-core_2.12:2.1.0 - defines the maven artifact dependency of delta-core_2.21 for the version 2.1.0. You must match the version with precisely what you defined as the `delta-spark` pip dependency. If you are not sure about the artifact name, here is a reference: https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.delta/delta-core. The artifact name will be different but the version is whats important.
> 
> 2. pyspark-shell specifies to use the pyspark java class when running spark jobs locally. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `io.delta:delta-core_2.12:2.1.0` - defines the maven artifact dependency of delta-core_2.21 for the version 2.1.0. You must match the version with precisely what you defined as the `delta-spark` pip dependency. If you are not sure about the artifact name, here is a reference: https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.delta/delta-core. The artifact name will be different but the version is whats important.

2. `pyspark-shell` specifies to use the pyspark java class when running spark jobs locally. 
```

Minor formatting to highlight the arguments

*docker-compose.yml*
```
version: "3.9"

services:
  test:
    build:
      context: .
      dockerfile: Dockerfile
    container_name: test
    volumes:
      - .:/src
```

> Then we just need to run docker-compose up to re-run the tests whenever we make changes or create new ones locally. Of course, the volume mount in the compose file will depend on your project structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we can run `docker-compose up` to re-run the tests whenever we make changes or create new ones locally. Of course, the volume mount in the compose file will depend on your project structure.
```

I try to avoid using words like `just` since it can come across as condesending - https://www.awesomecodereviews.com/respectful-code-review-feedback/

In your before hook for all tests, you will need to create a local spark session object (see code below). What's important is that we use `configure_spark_with_delta_pip` to ensure that the Delta Lake Maven JARs are installed and is hence one of the few reasons why we specified the `delta-spark` dependency to begin with. 

```
from pyspark.sql.session import SparkSession
from delta import configure_spark_with_delta_pip
import pytest

@pytest.fixture(scope="session")
def spark():
    builder = SparkSession.builder.appName("local-spark-session").config("spark.sql.extensions", "io.delta.sql.DeltaSparkSessionExtension").config("spark.sql.catalog.spark_catalog", "org.apache.spark.sql.delta.catalog.DeltaCatalog")

    return configure_spark_with_delta_pip(builder).getOrCreate()
```

See the docs local [delta lake setup](https://docs.delta.io/latest/quick-start.html#python) if you wish to learn more.

> ### Writing Test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Writing Tests
```
or

```suggestion
### Writing Our First Test
```

minor wording suggestion for readability

Author: going to go for `Writing Our First Test`

---
layout: post
font: serif
title: Databricks - An Approach To Unit Testing
date: 2022-10-27
highlight: monokai
author: Bryan Yu
image: /img/blog/databricks/databricks.png
tags: databricks deltatable dataframes spark workflows integration unit testing
description: Lets look at testing our code using delta lake and spark
---

> Before we commence, please note that any examples and discussions below regarding unit testing will be focused on users who are currently writing their code in `python 3` and running orchestrations via `Databricks Workflows` as `Delta Live Tables` are a separate topic altogether. 

Reviewer 2: I feel like the intro needs more bang.. why should I read it? Why should I care?

Author: mm true, its bit dull

> The following topics will be covered here as we make our way to unit testing. If you are already familiar points 1-3, them skip to the last section at the bottom `Unit Testing`: 

Reviewer 2: familiar WITH points 1-3

1. Delta Lake
2. Apache Spark & PySpark
3. Integration Testing 
4. Unit Testing

### Delta Lake

<img height="100px" src="/img/blog/databricks/delta-lake.png" />
<br/><br/>

> Delta Lake is the open source storage framework providing key features such as ACID transactions and time travel features. Delta Lake is not only compatible with Spark but is also what Databricks utilises for data storage and table management. As a result the types of tables we will be dealing with for the most part are delta tables. The sotrage format of these delta tables are basically parquet files. 

Reviewer 2: sotrage should be storage

Author: English

### Integration Testing

While integration testing on Databricks is not covered in this blog, is essential in my opnion that time and effort are still dedicated into comprehensively writing these out as well using a library like `Great Expectations`, running in a notebook and serving as an additional step at the gold layer of your workflow. This serves its purpose to verify that data quality standards are constantly met and if anything unexpected comes up, we fail the workflow and generate a detailed visual report for users to view and understand what the unexpected data is before it gets to the consumers. 

With that said, defects in data quality may appear as a consequence of the following scenarios such as regression in our data transformation logic or changes in upstream system which resulted in changes to data layout, representation, schema and so forth.

### Unit Testing

> So it seems that integration tests for our data pipeline is plentiful beneficial but why not stop there? well, one of the few benefits of unit testing is that we get to rapidly ensure our `code` meets quality standards and whilst detection certain regressions earlier in the dev lifecycle which thusly give us more confidence to move faster as code can get committed and deployed more frequently. Lets now dive into the details of unit testing our code.

Reviewer 2: plentiful beneficial? or plenty beneficial

Reviewer 2: detection or detecting?

Reviewer 2: thusly??

Author: ee good points, edited to `detecting` and `plenty beneficial`. Removed thusly

First call to action is to think carefully about what you want the scope of the unit tests to be. In most cases from experience it would boil down to the data transformation logic. We will have to do a bit of refactoring if necessary to isolate all logic related to Spark data frames in a single testable function while keeping the Databricks runtime libs out. We may choose to do this by having variables as fakes for those libraries passed in as arguments in the test or relocate the calls outside the function instead. 

One other thing we will definitely need to do is to make have Spark session object passed in a function argument where you run those data frame operations. This is because Databrick's global spark object will not be available outside the runtime.

> The next thing to take into account is that you will always have a main loop in your notebook that immideately runs the full ingestion code when a Databricks job is kicked off and this will certainly result in invoking Databricks libs. We need to ensure this is not executed via some measures such as introducing an environment variable boolean toggle so that its

Reviewer 2: immideately should be immediately

Author: how even English

import pyspark.sql.functions as F
from datetime import date

def transform_dataset(df):
    return df.select("name", "dob").where(F.col("dob") >= F.lit("1999-01-01") )

def test_date_filter(spark):
    schema = T.StructType([
        T.StructField("name", T.StringType(), True),
        T.StructField("dob", T.DateType(), True),
    ])

    data = [
    (
        "John",
        date(1978, 5, 8)
    ),
    (
        "Tim",
        date(1999, 2, 8)
    ),
    (
        "James",
       date(1996, 6, 9)
    )]
    
    df = spark.createDataFrame(data=data, schema=schema)
    transformed_df = transform_dataset(df)

    results = transformed_df.collect()
    
    assert len(results) == 1
    assert results[0]["name"] == "Tim"
   

```

### Troubleshooting

Q: I've got the latest version of Python but I am receiving error such as `_pickle.PicklingError: Could not serialize object: IndexError: tuple index out of range` when I run my tests... halp!

A: Check the Py readiness docs https://pyreadiness.org/3.11/ to see that PySpark is supported for the desired python version (i.e. 3.11).

### Conclusion

Well thats about it!, hope this was helpful by some measure. 

> As a final note, you can expand the scope of your test if you wish by importing the code that creates your destination table for the initial setup, then running the function that transforms and merges the data in there. 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a final call to action? Contact us for any databricks projects (with a link)

Author: phew, got that in
